---
layout: post
title: AlcaSAT
---

{% include mathjs.html %}

[Alcazar](http://www.theincrediblecompany.com/alcazar-1/) is a new pen and paper puzzle game created by [the incredible game company](http://www.theincrediblecompany.com/).
I first heard about Alcazar when [Jonathan Blow](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonathan_Blow) posted about his interest in the game:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet tw-align-center" lang="en"><p>These puzzles are pretty neat: <a href="http://t.co/cAy4KFL5j9">http://t.co/cAy4KFL5j9</a></p>&mdash; Jonathan Blow (@Jonathan_Blow) <a href="https://twitter.com/Jonathan_Blow/status/468890123233681408">May 20, 2014</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

On the game's website you can try out some example games for free.
The goal of the game is to draw a single path through a maze that visits every cell of the gamefield.
The maze also has openings on its boundary and you have to enter in one and exit in another.
Furthermore you are not allowed to cross your path.

{% include imagecaption.html url="/static/alcazar/example.png" description="A simple example of an Alcazar puzzle (left) and its solution (right)."%}

The puzzle reminded me of my thesis, so I tried to implement a solver for it.
First up was the representation of the game in a 2-dimensional array.

<div class ="leftfloatimg">
{% highlight python %}
x x x x x x x
x 0 - 0 - 0 x
x | x x x | x
- 0 x 0 - 0 x
x   x | x   x
- 0 x 0 - 0 x
x | x x x | x
x 0 - 0 - 0 x
x x x x x x x
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

In this representation every cell is represented by a ```0```, a wall by a ```x```, a line segment which is set by ```|``` or ```-``` and an unset line segment by an empty space.
Notice that most of the entries in the array aren't necessary to consider for a solver algorithm because we only care about which lines are set or not.
In fact we only care about the array items \\( \\{ (i,j) \mid mod(i,2)=1 \oplus mod(j,2)=1\\} =\\) \\( \\{ (1,0), (0,1), (1,2), (2,1), (3,0), (0,3), ... \\} \\).

<br style="clear:both">

## SAT-solving

[SAT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem) is the
problem of finding a satisfying assignment of a (in this case boolean) logic formula.
Here is an example of a boolean formula:
\\[ f = (x \to y) \wedge (\neg x \vee y) \\]

The [operators](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_connective#List_of_common_logical_connectives) of boolean formulas are \\( \\{ \wedge \text{(and)} \\) , \\( \vee \text{(or)} \\) , \\( \to \text{(implication)} \\) , \\( \neg \text{(not)} \\} \\)
and \\( \\{ x, y, ..\\} \\) represent variables in the domain \\( \\{true,false\\} \\).
An assignment is just a function which *assigns* every variable a truth value.

\\[ a(x) \to true, a(y) \to false \\]

With a formula and an assignment you can evaluate the truth value of the formula
by first replacing the variables with their truth values and then using the [truth
table](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_table) of the operators recursively:

\\[ a(f) = a((x \to y) \wedge (\neg x \vee y))= \\\\
a(x \to y) \wedge a(\neg x \vee y) =\\\\
(a(x) \to a(y)) \wedge (a(\neg x) \vee a(y)) = \\\\
(true \to false) \wedge (\neg true \vee false)=\\\\
false \wedge (false \vee false)=\\\\
false \wedge false=\\\\
false
\\]

As was shown the formula \\( f \\) with the assignment \\( a \\) evaluates to \\(\text{false}\\).
An assignment \\( a \\) of \\( f \\) is called **satisfying** if and only if \\( a(f)=true \\).
In the example above a satisfying assignment is \\(a(x)=true, a(y)=true \\).
The problem of finding such a satisfying assignment is
[hard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem#Unrestricted_satisfiability_.28SAT.29) but there exist [free solvers](http://minisat.se/) which solve formulas with million of variables in a matter of seconds.

You might ask yourself how this process might solve Alcazar puzzles. Well let's try it
with a simpler example: You want to know if the grass is wet and you know that
it is wet when it rains. First you decide which variables you have in the
statement: \\( wet \text{(the grass is wet)} \\) and \\( rained \text{(it rained)}\\).
It is important that the variables can only be \\(true\\) or \\( false \\).
Next you define a formula which captures the dynamics of the system: \\( rained
\to wet \\).
Now we can find satisfying assignments of the formula when we know that it has
rained:
\\[ rained \wedge ( rained \to wet ) \\]
The formula reads like this: "it rained AND (IF it rained THEN wet)".

Now we hand the formula to our SAT-solver which spits out \\( a(rained)=true, a(wet)=true \\) and we know that
it rained and the grass is wet.
The process of defining the meaning of the variables and generating the formula
is called encoding.

## Encoding Alcazar puzzles
<div class ="leftfloatimg">
{% highlight python %}
x x x x x x x
x 0 - 0 - 0 x
x   x x x   x
  0 x 0   0 x
x   x   x | x
  0 x 0   0 x
x   x x x   x
x 0   0   0 x
x x x x x x x
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

In the Alcazar puzzle we have line segments which can be either turned on or
off. They are therefore a perfect candidate for the set of variables
\\( \\{x\_{i,j} \mid puzzle\_{}(i,j)=\text{'} \enspace \text{'} \\} \\).
Here's an example of a puzzle where \\( a\_{}(x\_{2,1})=true\\), \\( a\_{}(x\_{4,1})=true \\) , \\( a\_{}(x\_{5,4})=true \\) and for all other \\( a\_{}(x\_{i,j})=false \\).

<br style="clear:both">
Now we need to generate a formula given a puzzle. To make things easier later, 
we define a helper function \\( two( x\_{0}, ..., x\_{n-1})\\) which takes
as an input \\( n \\) variables and outputs a formula which is satisfiable if and only if 
2 of the variables are assigned the \\( true \\) value. In math :
\\[ a(two(x\_{0}, ..., x\_{n-1})) = true \\\\ \iff \\\\
\rvert \rvert \\{x\_i \mid a(x\_i) = true\\}\rvert \rvert = 2 \\]

The formula is constructed by generating all combinations of the variables and
only leaving 2 variables normal and negating the rest. We join the combinations
with the \\( \vee \text{(or)}\\) operator:
\\[
two(x\_{0},...,x\_{n-1}) = \\\\
\bigvee_{i<j} (x\_{i} \wedge x\_{j} \bigwedge\_{k \notin \\{ i,j \\}} \neg x\_{k})
\\]

Here's an example of generating the formula for 3 variables and all the
satisfying assignments
\\[two(x\_0,x\_1,x\_2) = (x\_0 \wedge x\_1 \wedge \neg x\_2) \vee \\\\
(x\_0 \wedge x\_2 \wedge \neg x\_1) \vee (x\_1 \wedge x\_2 \wedge \neg x\_0) \\\\
\begin{array}{c|lcr}
a\_i(x) & x\_0 & x\_1 & x\_2 \\\\
\hline
a\_0 & true & true & false \\\\
a\_1 & true & false & true \\\\
a\_2 & false & true & true
\end{array}
\\]
As expected in all the satisfying assignments the number of variables which
were assigned the \\( true \\) value was 2.
Equipped with this new function we can now tackle the problem of generating a
formula for Alcazar puzzles. Our 2 requirements for our formula are

  * Exactly 2 exit lines have to be active
  * Every cell has exactly 2 active neighbouring line segments

These 2 requirements ensure that we generate a valid path.
Consider that the number of lines in a cell is:

  * 0, the cell never gets a visit, so the whole solution would be wrong.
  * 1, one line enters the cell but never leaves it, which means that the path
	would end in this cell.
  * 2, one line enters the cell and another one leaves the cell. This is what
	we want.
  * 3 or 4, too many lines enter the cell, which means that we generate a
	crossing in the path. 
{% highlight python %}
# Some examples for number of lines in a cell
# 0        1        2        3        4
x   x    x   x    x   x    x   x    x | x
  0        0 -      0 -    - 0 -    - 0 -
x   x    x   x    x | x    x | x    x | x
{% endhighlight %}

The formulas for the requirements are
\\[
two( \\{ x\_{i,j} \mid x\_{i,j} \in exits \\}) \\\\
{\Large\forall}\_{cell} two(neigh(cell))
\\]
where \\( neigh(cell) \\) returns a set of neighboring line segments of the cell
which are not walls and \\( exits \\) is the set of all lines which are on the
boundary of the puzzle.
In the example above \\( neigh(1,1) = \\{ x\_{1,2} , x\_{2,1} \\} \\) and \\( exits= \\{
x\_{0,3}, x\_{0,5} \\} \\).
Basically we are now done: Given a puzzle we find the exits and generate the
first formula, then we visit every cell, generating the second formula and
finally join all the formulas with the \\( \wedge \text{(AND)}\\) operator.
This formula is descriptive enough to generate correct solutions for small
puzzles like the one above but problems arise if we feed our algorithm bigger puzzles.

{% include imagecaption.html url="/static/alcazar/loops.png" description="Bigger puzzles generate false assignments because of loops" %}

## The loop problem
We observe that our requirements were not descriptive enough after all. The
problem is that we never encoded that there should be only one path. To solve
this problem we could define a formula which expresses that every line should
be reachable by one exit. This would guarantee that there is only one path in
the assignment. To encode such a reachability constraint we would have to
encode every possible path in a smart way ( I covered one of them in my
[bachelor thesis](/static/papers/ba-thesis.pdf)). A simpler
approach is to use the SAT-solver to quickly generate possible assignments,
analyze them with a non-SAT technique and then feeding the new information back
to the formula. This technique is called a hybrid-approach and uses the best of
both worlds (quickly generating possible solutions and enforcing complex
constraints).

## Hybrid-solving
The Hybrid-solver for Alcasat works by generating a possible assignment as
usual and then finding all loops in the generated solution. In the example
above it would find one loop in the left upper corner: 
\\( loop= \\{ x\_{1,2}, x\_{2,1}, x\_{3,2}, x\_{2,3} \\} \\).
For every loop it now generates a new formula \\( \bigvee\_{l \in loop} \neg l \\) which gets added to the
already existing formula. These new loop formulas guarantee that in the new
solutions there can't exist the same loop again.
We repeat this process of *SAT-solving* and *loop finding* until we find a solution without loops.
{% include imagecaption.html url="/static/alcazar/loopsolved.png" description="The hybrid approach finds the correct solution in 2 iterations" %}

## Implementation
[AlcaSAT](https://github.com/david-westreicher/alcazar) was implemented in python and I used [minisat](http://minisat.se/) for the SAT-solving part.
Creating the GUI was easy due to the pipeline I used:

  * create a ```*.ui``` file with
	[qtdesigner](http://qt-project.org/doc/qt-4.8/designer-manual.html), a
	WYSIWYG editor for GUI's
  * use pyside-uic to convert the ```*.ui``` file to a python script
  * importing the generated python files into the ```controller.py``` 

Here's a demo of the application:
{% include video.html src="/static/alcazar/demo.mp4" %}

If you want to build AlcaSAT yourself, you need ```minisat``` and
```pyside-uic``` in your environment.

```
sudo apt-get install minisat
sudo apt-get install pyside-tools
```

Then you should be able to run

```
git clone https://github.com/david-westreicher/alcazar
cd alcazar
make
python src/alcazar.py
```
