---
layout: post
title: Alcasat
---

{% include mathjs.html %}

[Alcazar]() is a new pen and paper puzzle game created by [gerard]().
I first heard about Alcazar when [Jonathan Blow]() posted about his interest in the game:
# include twitter

On the game's website you can try out some example games.
The goal of the game is to draw a single path through the maze that visits every cell of the gamefield.

{% include imagecaption.html url="/static/alcazar/example.png" description="A simple example of an Alcazar puzzle (left) and its solution (right)."%}

I tried to solve the 4th puzzle, but after 15 minutes I was thinking about how I could implement a solver for the game.
I closed the tab on my browser and opened up [vim]() and the coding began.


First up was the representation of the game in a 2-dimensional array.

<div class ="leftfloatimg">
{% highlight python %}
x x x x x x x
x 0   0   0 x
x   x x x   x
  0 x 0   0 x
x   x   x   x
  0 x 0   0 x
x   x x x   x
x 0   0   0 x
x x x x x x x
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

In this representation every cell is represented by a "0", a wall by a "x" and a possible line segment by an empty space.
The line segments which touch the boundaries of the puzzles are called *exits*
and we have to make sure that we enter in one *exit* and end our path in one.
Notice that most of the entries in the array aren't necessary for a solver algorithm because we only care about which lines are set or not.

<br style="clear:both">

## SAT-solving

[SAT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem) is the
problem of finding a satisfying assignment of a (in this case boolean) logic formula.
Here is an example of a boolean formula:
\\[ f = (x \to y) \wedge (\neg x \vee y) \\]

The [operators](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_connective#List_of_common_logical_connectives) for boolean formulas are \\( \\{ \wedge \text{(and)}, \vee \text{(or)}, \to \text{(implication)}, \neg \text{(not)} \\} \\)
and \\( \\{ x, y, ..\\} \\) represent variables in the domain \\( \\{true,false\\} \\).
An assignment is just a function which *assigns* every variable a truth value.

\\[ a(x) \to true, a(y) \to false \\]

With a formula and an assignment you can evaluate the truth value of the formula
by first replacing the variables with their truth values and then using the [truth
table](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_table) of the operators recursively:

\\[ a(f) = a((x \to y) \wedge (\neg x \vee y))= \\\\
a(x \to y) \wedge a(\neg x \vee y) =\\\\
(a(x) \to a(y)) \wedge (a(\neg x) \vee a(y)) = \\\\
(true \to false) \wedge (\neg true \vee false)=\\\\
false \wedge (false \vee false)=\\\\
false \wedge false=\\\\
false
\\]

As was shown the formula \\( f \\) with the assignment \\( a \\) generates a \\(\text{false}\\) value.
An assignment \\( a \\) of \\( f \\) is called satisfying if and only if \\( a(f)=true \\).
In the example above a satisfying assignment is \\(a(x)=true, a(y)=true \\).
The problem of finding such a satisfying assignment is
[hard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_satisfiability_problem#Unrestricted_satisfiability_.28SAT.29) but there exist [free solvers](http://minisat.se/) which solve formulas with million of variables in a matter of seconds.

You might ask yourself how this process might solve alcazar puzzles. Well let's try it
with a simpler example: You want to know if the grass is wet and you know that
it is wet when it rains. First you decide which variables you have in the
statement: \\( wet \text{(the grass is wet)} \\) and \\( rained \text{(it rained)}\\).
It is important that the variables can only be \\(true\\) or \\( false \\).
Next you define a formula which captures the dynamics of the system: \\( rained
\to wet \\).
Now we can find satisfying assignments of the formula when we know that it has
rained:
\\[ rained \wedge ( rained \to wet ) \\]
The formula reads like this: "it rained AND (IF it rained THEN wet)".

Now we hand the formula to our SAT-solver which spits out \\( a(rained)=true, a(wet)=true \\) and we know that
it rained and the grass is wet.
The process of defining the meaning of the variables and generating the formula
is called encoding.

## Encoding Alcazar puzzles
<div class ="leftfloatimg">
{% highlight python %}
x x x x x x x
x 0 - 0 - 0 x
x   x x x   x
  0 x 0   0 x
x   x   x | x
  0 x 0   0 x
x   x x x   x
x 0   0   0 x
x x x x x x x
{% endhighlight %}
</div>

In the alcazar puzzle we have line segments which can be either turned on or
off. They are therefore a perfect candidate for the set of variables
\\( \\{x\_{i,j} \mid puzzle\_{}(i,j)=\text{'} \enspace \text{'} \\} \\).
Here's an example of a puzzle where \\( a\_{}(x\_{2,1})=true\\), \\( a\_{}(x\_{4,1})=true \\) , \\( a\_{}(x\_{5,4})=true \\) and for all other \\( a\_{}(x\_{i,j})=false \\).

<br style="clear:both">
Now we need to generate a formula given a puzzle. To make things easier later, 
we define a helper function \\( two( x\_{0}, ..., x\_{n-1})\\) which takes
as an input \\( n \\) variables and outputs a formula which is satisfiable if and only if 
2 of the variables are assigned the \\( true \\) value. In math :
\\[ a(two(x\_{0}, ..., x\_{n-1})) = true \\\\ \iff \\\\
\rvert \rvert \\{x\_i \mid a(x\_i) = true\\}\rvert \rvert = 2 \\]

The formula is constructed by generating all combinations of the variables and
only leaving 2 variables normal and negating the rest. We join the combinations
with the \\( \vee \text{(or)}\\) operator:
\\[
two(x\_{0},...,x\_{n-1}) = \\\\
\bigvee_{i<j} (x\_{i} \wedge x\_{j} \bigwedge\_{k \notin \\{ i,j \\}} \neg x\_{k})
\\]

Here's an example of generating the formula for 3 variables and all the
satisfying assignments
\\[two(x\_0,x\_1,x\_2) = (x\_0 \wedge x\_1 \wedge \neg x\_2) \vee \\\\
(x\_0 \wedge x\_2 \wedge \neg x\_1) \vee (x\_1 \wedge x\_2 \wedge \neg x\_0) \\\\
\\]
\\[
\begin{array}{c|lcr}
a\_i(x) & x\_0 & x\_1 & x\_2 \\\\
\hline
a\_0 & true & true & false \\\\
a\_1 & true & false & true \\\\
a\_2 & false & true & true
\end{array}
\\]
As expected in all the satisfying assignments the number of variables which
were assigned the \\( true \\) value was 2.
Equipped with this new function we can now tackle the problem of generating a
formula for alcazar puzzles. Our 2 requirements for our formula are

  * Exactly 2 exits have to be active
  * Every cell has exactly 2 active neighbouring line segments

These 2 requirements ensure that we generate a valid path:

  * There is no crossing of line segments in one cell, because we would need
	three or more active lines to cross
  * we visit every cell, because otherwise the number of lines in this cell
	would be 0
  * We enter in one exit and leave in another

The formulas for the requirements are
\\[
two( \\{ x\_{i,j} \mid x\_{i,j} \in exits \\}) \\\\
{\Large\forall}\_{cell} two(neigh(cell))
\\]
where \\( neigh(cell) \\) returns a set of neighboring line segments of the cell
which are not walls.
In the example above \\( neigh(1,1) = \\{ x\_{1,2} , x\_{2,1} \\} \\).
Basically we are now done: Given a puzzle we find the exits and generate the
first formula, then we visit every cell, generating the second formula and
finally join all the formulas with the \\( \wedge \text{(AND)}\\) operator.
This formula is descriptive enough to generate correct solutions for small
puzzles like the one above but problems arise if we feed our algorithm bigger puzzles.

{% include imagecaption.html url="/static/alcazar/loops.png" description="Bigger puzzles generate false assignments because of loops" %}

## The loop problem
We observe that our requirements were not descriptive enough after all. The
problem is that we never encoded that there should be only one path. To solve
this problem we could define a formula which expresses that every line should
be reachable by one exit. This would guarantee that there is only one path in
the assignment. To encode such a reachability constraint we would have to
encode every possible path in a smart way ( I covered one of them in my
[bachelor thesis](http://0.0.0.0:4000/static/papers/ba-thesis.pdf)). A simpler
approach is to use the SAT-solver to quickly generate possible assignments,
analyze them with a non-SAT technique and then feeding the new information back
to the formula. This technique is called a hybrid-approach and uses the best of
both worlds (quickly generating possible solutions and enforcing complex
constraints).

## Hybrid-solving
The Hybrid-solver for alcasat works by generating a possible assignment as
usual and then finding all loops in the generated solution. In the example
above it would find one loop in the left upper corner: 
\\( loop= \\{ x\_{1,2}, x\_{2,1}, x\_{3,2}, x\_{2,3} \\} \\).
For every loop it now generates a new formula \\( \bigvee\_{l \in loop} \neg l \\) which gets added to the
already existing formula. These new loop formulas guarantee that in the new
solutions there can't exist a loop involving the variables of the loops,
because if all the lines of the loops would be active, the formula would
evaluate to \\( false \\).
{% include imagecaption.html url="/static/alcazar/loopsolved.png" description="The hybrid approach finds the correct solution in 2 iterations" %}

## Implementation

{% include video.html src="/static/alcazar/demo.mp4" %}

